DATE DOWNLOADED: Sat Sep  6 15:23:30 2025

SOURCE: Content Downloaded from

HeinOnline

Citations:

Please note: citations are provided as a general guideline. Users should consult their preferred citation format's style manual for proper citation formatting.

Bluebook 21st ed.GLYPH<10>GLYPH<9>GLYPH<9>GLYPH<9>

Bruce A. Green & Rebecca Roiphe, When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now, 110 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 719 (Fall 2020).

ALWD 7th ed.

Bruce A. Green & Rebecca Roiphe, When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now, 110 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 719 (2020).

APA 7th ed.

Green, B. A., & Roiphe, Rebecca. (2020). When prosecutors politick: progressive law enforcers then and now. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 110(4), 719-768.

Chicago 17th ed.

Bruce A. Green; Rebecca Roiphe, "When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now," Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 110, no. 4 (Fall 2020): 719-768

McGill Guide 10th ed.

Bruce A. Green & Rebecca Roiphe, "When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now" (2020) 110:4 J Crim L & Criminology 719.

AGLC 4th ed.

Bruce A. Green and Rebecca Roiphe, 'When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now' (2020) 110(4) Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 719

MLA 9th ed.

Green, Bruce A., and Rebecca Roiphe. "When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now." Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, vol. 110, no. 4, Fall 2020, pp. 719-768. HeinOnline.

Bruce A. Green & Rebecca Roiphe, 'When Prosecutors Politick: Progressive Law Enforcers Then and Now' (2020) 110 J Crim L & Criminology 719               x

Please note: citations are provided as a general guideline. Users should consult their preferred citation format's style manual for proper citation formatting.

OSCOLA 4th ed. Cite this document

PinCite this document

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license agreement available at

https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from  uncorrected OCR text.

WHEN PROSECUTORS POLITICK: PROGRESSIVE LAW ENFORCERS THEN AND  NOW

BRUCE A.  GREEN & REBECCA ROIPHE*

A  new  and  recognizable group of reform-minded prosecutors has assumed the mantle ofprogressive  prosecution. The term is hard  to define in part  because its adherents embrace a diverse set of  policies and  priorities. In comparing the contemporary  movement with Progressive  Era prosecutors, this  Article has two related  goals. First, it seeks to better  define progressive prosecution. Second,  it uses  a historical  comparison to  draw some  lessons for the  current  movement.  Both groups of  prosecutors  were elected on  a  wave of  popular  support. Unlike today's  mainstream prosecutors  who tend to campaign  and  labor  in relative obscurity, these two sets  of  prosecutors  received a good  deal of  popular attention  and support. The Progressive  Era reformers introduced  the  notion  promoted by  current progressive  prosecutors  that  crime is a social  phenomenon, which community  services  are  better  equipped  to  address  than prisons.  The Progressive  Era  movement also sought  to implement  professional  norms and practices to promote the values of  fairness and  proportionality. Contemporary  progressive prosecutors inherit this legacy  but tend not to emphasize these  professional  values. The Article  concludes that  the professional  values championed  during the Progressive  Era  are critical, in conjunction with new programs and  policies,  to  ensure that as innovation

helps  achieve  social justice, prosecution remains in  the  hands  of those committed to fair  and  even-handed  justice.

INTRODUCTION

Since  2016,  "progressive  prosecutors"  have won elections  on promises to reduce mass incarceration  and redress the unfair treatment of the poor and minorities  in the  criminal justice system.' The progressive politics of the day have  filtered  into  prosecutorial  elections,  and  prosecutors  are  drawing  on a populist  movement to fuel their campaigns and platforms. 2 Their election  as

district and  county  attorneys marks a  significant  break  from  the  law-andorder approach to  prosecution that dominated for decades. 3

This  is  not the  first time  that reformers  pursued  a  new  approach  to prosecution.  The Progressive  Era  reform movement  in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries  included a promise to overhaul  an outdated, corrupt criminal justice system, including replacing corrupt  prosecutors who belonged to the  party machines. While the Progressive  Era and the present are  not  the  only  times  when  criminal  law  reform  has been  pressing, 4 these particular historical  periods  are worth comparing  because, in  both  cases, prosecutor  elections were  and  are  politically salient,  drawing  significant attention and popular support.

The  Progressive Era criminal justice  reform  movement had  several defining features.  Its  aim  was  to  combat  corruption  by  professionalizing criminal justice: reformers sought to replace political cronies with disinterested  experts  who  applied  the  law  to  facts  rather than basing  their decisions on impermissible  personal,  partisan,  or political  considerations.' Progressive  Era reformers  also  rejected  nineteenth-century  notions  of free will and personal responsibility, believing instead that biology and environment shaped individuals' conduct. 6 Finally, criminal justice reformers  sought  to bring  rational business  management  to  chaotic  courts. During  this  era,  lawyers  seeking  election  as  prosecutors  under the  reform banner,  most  famously  William Travers Jerome of Manhattan, challenged office holders who  were beholden  to  a  political party  and  dedicated  to

powerful and moneyed interests. 7 The legacy of disinterested and independent  prosecutorial  professionalism, which  Jerome exemplified, is now widely accepted,  if  not taken for granted.

This Article compares the new progressive prosecutors to the Progressive Era  criminal  justice reformers to identify  the benefits  and concerns  that accompany a prosecutorial  reform movement  linked to popular politics.  The successes and failures of Progressive Era criminal justice reform offer a cautionary tale to progressive prosecutors who draw  on active popular support to  feed  their campaigns  and platforms.  While  populist  energy  lends momentum  and  political  will  for positive  change,  it can  also  be  in  tension with professional values. The Article concludes that contemporary progressive  prosecutors ought to take  care not to sacrifice professionalism to broader social justice policy goals.  The  Article also  cautions that, although a focus  on the social context in which crime occurs is progress from the cruder nineteenth-century  conception of free will  and personal responsibility,  it too has  its dangers.

Part  I  of the  Article  describes  the  criminal  justice  reform  movement during the Progressive  Era and its legacy.  Part  II then turns to contemporary progressive  prosecutors.  Focusing especially  on the exercise  of  prosecutorial discretion, it  highlights how  progressive  prosecutors have  distinguished themselves  from their mainstream contemporaries  and, in doing  so, how they compare with Progressive  Era reformers. Finally, Part III offers some lessons from history.

I.  CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM IN THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

A.  PROGRESSIVE  ERA PROSECUTORS

Beginning around  1870, the progressive  movement emerged to address the  increasingly  complex problems  of industrial  capitalism  in America.  The rapidly changing  economy  brought  an influx  of  new  immigrants  from southern  and  eastern  Europe,  as  well  as  a  migration  of a  large  number  of African  Americans  from  the  South  to  northern  cities.  The  social  problems were  complex:  overcrowding,  increases  in crime,  clashing  of cultures,  and more. These new conditions were accompanied by harsh working  conditions,

poverty, child labor, and more  women  in  the  workforce.'  While the progressive  movement  was  in no  way  monolithic,  its  proponents  shared  a concern  about  these  social  conditions  and  came  to  a  consensus  on  some common  causes and means to address them. 9

One  target  of  the  Progressive Era  reform  movement  was  criminal justice. The conditions of  urban America, along with the increased concentration of people from diverse communities, contributed to an increase in  crime  and corruption.' 0 The Progressive  Era reformers  sought to address this in various ways.  This Part highlights three  aspects  of  the Progressive  Era criminal justice reform movement  that  had  particular significance for criminal  prosecutors:  Section  B examines  Progressive  Era reformers' focus on  administrative  efficiency;  Section  C  looks  at their faith  in  expertise  and professionalization;  and  Section D underscores their belief that crime  was a symptom  of a larger  social problem.  Finally,  Section E  focuses  on what  we regard as Progressive Era prosecutors' most significant legacy for contemporary  prosecutors:  their conception  of  prosecutors' professional  role and responsibilities.

B.  RATIONALIZATION  AND BUREAUCRATIZATION  OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE

The Progressive  Era was the heyday of muckrakers,  the journalists  and social reformers who sought to shed light on the corruption,  inefficiency,  and evils  of industrial  capitalism.  The  most  famous  of their works  was  Upton Sinclair's The  Jungle, which  described  the  harsh  conditions  of immigrant workers in Chicago and exposed the unsanitary conditions of  America's meat packing  plants."  Along  these  lines-albeit  in  a  far  less  dramatic  way-

reformers  described,  in  minute detail,  the  sluggish  inefficiency  and venality of municipal  courts.12

The  municipal  courts  in  Cleveland,  for  instance,  were  populated  by prosecutors  who  knew nothing  about the  cases,  carried no  papers,  and  kept few  files.1 3 Cases  were  disposed  of without  public  scrutiny.  Prosecutors whispered in the ears of  the judges, who issued decisions to continue the case or  impose  a light  penalty,  while  defense  attorneys  drifted  around the  room doing  little  to  nothing.1 4 Courts  were  dirty,  dark,  and  noisy,  belying  any misconceived  sense  of the  administration  of impartial  justice."  As  urban planner and reformer Alfred Bettman and his co-author Howard F. Burns put it,  anyone would be left with the impression that "results are  dependent upon favor  or strange  influences  [rather]  than upon a judgment  of  the  court  based exclusively  on the  dictates  of law  and justice." 6 Drawing  on the efficiency movement  pioneered by Frederick Taylor  and others, criminal  justice reformers  hoped to make  courts  look  more like  businesses than government agencies."

The  inefficiency  of prosecutors' offices,  like  that of the  courts,  made them susceptible to corruption.  The lack of documentation and the individual prosecutors' power to dismiss cases  bred a sense that criminal justice was for sale to those  with political,  social,  or financial  influence.1 8  When asked why he did not discipline his subordinates when they neglected their cases  or acted

improperly,  one  reform  prosecutor  in  Cleveland  responded  that he  had no control  over the assistant prosecutors, who "were appointed just as he was."19 A  county  prosecutor  developed  a policy  of keeping  assistant prosecutors  in the dark about their cases until shortly before  trial so they would not have the time to corruptly  drop or block a prosecution. 2 0

Reformers  insisted  that  the  municipal  prosecutor  ought  to  be  like  an executive of  a  large business  or  the  managing  clerk of  a  law  office. 2 1 Specialization,  a key goal of  the  efficiency movement,  was seen as critical to the proper functioning  of  prosecutors' offices. The reformers were convinced that the  existing  system,  in which prosecutors  handled  all  different  sorts and stages  of cases,  had led  to  both  corruption  and  amateurism.  Specialization would  breed  expertise  while  helping  to  ensure  oversight  such  that  no  one prosecutor  could corrupt the  system.  Thus,  as in a factory,  some  prosecutors should  serve  as  trial  assistants  and  others  should  manage  police-initiated charges, while another set should deal with complaints from the community. 2 2 Prosecutors  would become  experts  in their work,  a key to the impartial  administration of justice,  the  legitimacy  of the  criminal  justice system,  and  the  efficient  functioning  of the  system.  As  Bettman and  Burns concluded  in the volume  edited  by Felix Frankfurter  and Roscoe  Pound, the efficient  and  organized  administration  of  justice was  critical,  but would  fail without the  skilled  and professional  exercise  of discretion and judgment. 2 3

Reformers  understood that increased efficiency  would come at a cost to participatory  democracy.  While  susceptible to corruption,  the old model was also  fluid and informal.  In the  old system, complainants  could speak directly to judges,  witnesses,  victims,  and the  accused,  and  spoke with  one  another and  interacted  casually  to  bargain for  a desired  result.  While  not all  parties were  equal  in  this  spoils  system,  anyone  could  join  the  fray.  Reformers wanted  a  structure  with  rules  and  processes,  something  more  arcane  that would no  doubt  make  the process  less  accessible.  As  rules  and  procedures grew more  intricate and  were more  consistently enforced, individuals accused  of crimes  as  well  as  other  participants  had  to  rely  on  lawyers  to navigate  the  system. However,  the  imposition  of  rational  systems,  rules,  and processes would also help weed out corruption  and ensure fair results, an end that seemed pressing  given that individual liberty  was at stake. 2 4

C. PROFESSIONALIZATION

Progressive  Era  courtroom  reformers  largely  targeted  corruption.  The urban  criminal  courts had become  a tool  of  party  machine  politics  or, as one contemporary  argued,  captive  to  the joint  interest of municipal  politics  and big business. 25 Rich,  well-connected  parties got their way.  Others  were given little  attention  and  often  had  no  way  to  pursue  their  complaints  or  defend against  allegations  of wrongdoing.  Progressive  Era  reformers  envisioned professionalism  as part  of  the  solution. 26

The  perceived need for  professionalism extended to prosecutors' offices.  As  Roscoe  Pound  described  in  his  book  about  criminal justice  in Cleveland, prosecutors  lacked  competence,  knowledge,  and training. 27  They were chosen for their political connections,  not for  their mastery  of  the law. 28 The  public  suspected  that  they  were  carrying  on  private  practices  while prosecuting cases, exposing them to persistent conflicts of  interest. 29  Bettman and Burns concluded that the office of the  prosecutor had to be  reformed  so as  "to attract  and hold  men of ability and  character." 30 Arthur  Train insisted that,  at  least for the  top  prosecutor,  character was the  more  important trait: "Courtesy,  courage,  broadmindedness,  and  scrupulous  integrity  are  needed rather than  legal ratiocination." 3

The  elite  bar  at  the  turn  of the  century  looked  down  on  lawyers  who practiced criminal law. Reformers sought to improve the image of prosecutors to match the import of  their work.  As observers  of  the  Cleveland system explained:

The  criminal  branch  of  the  administration of justice, dealing  as  it  does  with  the protection  of the  community  against  crime,  the  promotion  of the  peace, safety,  and

morals of the  inhabitants,  the  lives  and the  liberties  of men,  and,  therefore,  from  any intelligent  point of view,  the  more  important branch  of the  administration of the  law, has become  a sort of outlaw  field which many a lawyer avoids as he  avoids the  slums of the  city. 32

Reformers  understood that the chief prosecutor in particular ought to be a  professional,  possessing skill and  training, but  also  the capacity  and inclination  to resist public  influence.  As Bettman  and Burns put it,  it should not be that the  prosecutor permits  himself to be  carried hither or thither by  alternating  currents of public  cruelty  or  public  sentimentality  or blown  about  by  gusts of popular  or  press excitement.  He  should  be  the  captain  who  steadies  the  boat  and  at  the  same  time discovers new or improved routes to the havens of public order, security,  and morals. 33

The  solution  was  to  improve  the  prestige  and  professional  status  of the prosecutor's  office 34 by  hiring  professional  prosecutors  who  adhered  to proper processes instead of  using any means to achieve conviction. 35

One  of the  most  famous  Progressive  Era reform  prosecutors,  William Travers  Jerome,  posed a threat  to the  traditional  party  system  and  its  loyal district  attorneys  because  he was  honest and  incorruptible. 36 He derived  his power  directly  from  the  people  and  won  favor  with  the  poor  and  the  rich alike,  posing a distinct threat to the  entrenched politicians. 37 As one editorial writer  explained  during his  campaign: "If  the  people want  blackmailers  and other  criminals  vigorously  prosecuted  without fear  or  favor they  will  elect Judge  Jerome." 3 8 When he was elected,  Jerome sought to professionalize  the New York  County  District  Attorney's office  by hiring  young  lawyers  who were just a few years out of law school. 39  He used recommendations by civic groups,  well-respected  lawyers,  or  both to  fill  the  office  with  professional assistants. 4 0 One  observer  complained,  "[i]n  the  ould  days a feller could use his pull;  now, the  divil take  it,  to get anythin' done you  got to hold up  your hand  and yell  'Hay-vard, Hay-vard,  Hay-vard."' 4 1

Arthur Train, who served as a prosecutor  in Manhattan  both before  and after  Jerome's election, 42 described  prosecutors' previous  approach  to their work:  "Prior to  the  muckraking  era the  traditional  concept  of a prosecutor was that of a bull-necked  gladiator with an undershot jaw, whose only object was  to  convict  every  unfortunate  charged  with  crime,  whether  innocent  or guilty." 43 This thought captured prosecutors' indifference to the evidence and to  the  possible  innocence of  the  accused.  It  also  conveyed  prosecutors' excessive  harshness,  at least toward the  working class and the  poor.

In  contrast,  Jerome  was  particularly  forgiving  of those  charged  with petty offenses,  focusing  instead on what he regarded as more serious  crimes, particularly  corruption. 44 He  believed  a harsher  approach  toward  the  poor would  erode  his  popular  support  and  undermine  the  reform  effort. 45  But Jerome's bid for popular support  in this respect coincided with  a conception of prosecutorial  professionalism, which called for making decisions  based on a  sense  of proportionality  rather  than  on  popular  preference  in  individual cases.  While  a more  lenient attitude  toward criminals  was not central to the Progressive  Era prosecutors' mission, it was a policy advanced by individual prosecutors, such  as  Jerome, who  were committed  to  preventing  crime instead of  simply punishing it. 46 For  instance, Jerome often expressed compassion for  defendants. Assistant prosecutors reported that  Jerome sometimes intervened  personally  in cases  that his  office  had worked  hard to win,  asking for leniency  for a convicted felon. 47

To Jerome,  equal  treatment  of the  rich and  poor  was just  as important as  proportionality.  When  Jerome  was  elected,  Train  explained,  the  criminal process  was marked  not just by inefficiency, but also by a particular breed of corruption  in which poor and rich were treated unequally. 48 Criminal justice was  for  sale.  It was  "prize  ring" justice  in  which the  rich  controlled  all  the fighting  men. 49 Another reformer argued that "our penal  machinery seems to recruit  its victims from  among those that are fighting  an unequal fight in the struggle  for  existence." 5 0 The  populist,  class-based  rhetoric,  however,  was

confined  to a  description  of the  problem.  The  solution was  not to hand  the system to the public but to conduct it with greater efficiency and professionalism.  Reformers  identified the  key defect in the  existing criminal justice  system as the  cozy attitude between  prosecutors and politicians-that is,  prosecutors'  lack of independence  from political  bosses  and the  criminal element."

Jerome's tenure  as  head  prosecutor  highlighted  the  tension  between professionalism and populism. Notwithstanding his commitment to professionalizing  criminal justice, Jerome  employed populist rhetoric.  In one speech to  a group  of wealthy  individuals  at  Carnegie  Hall,  he  raged:  "You are too respectable to  care about the teeming tenements  and the hovels where crouch  in darkness  a million  people of this  city." 5 2 But Jerome  resolved the tension in favor of professionalism  in the exercise  of authority.  Unlike many populists  who argued that the working  class should have more  direct control of  the government, 53 Jerome insisted that it was the wealthy who had a special obligation to run the city well:  "Every dollar you have  laid by,  every step you have  climbed  in  the  social  scale  has  laid  upon  you  an  obligation  of civic leadership,  and  you  have  failed.  You  are  not bad people.  You  are heartless people  and, above  all,  stupid people." 5 4

While professionalism  was the antidote  offered  for the  ills that seemed to plague  the  criminal  courts,  popular prosecutors  could  fall  victim to  their own  rhetoric.  For instance,  as District Attorney,  Jerome  tangled  with Howe and Hummel, the most famous defense  firm in the city and reportedly one  of the  most corrupt. 5 5 He set out to destroy Abe Hummel,  or "Little Abe," who was the underworld's most effective  advocate. 56 Like a superhero battling his nemesis,  Jerome  sought to destroy Hummel  once and for all. Having  caught one  of Hummel's famously dissolute  and corrupt clients,  Jerome fed a story to  the  press  that  Hummel  himself  might  escape  prison if  he  agreed  to cooperate  against his  clients. 7 Removing  an effective  defense lawyer in this way,  even if he was entangled in the corrupt activities of  those he represented, hardly  seems  to  exemplify  a  fair  and  professional  criminal  justice  system. Thus,  while  he  promoted  a  professional  office  dedicated  to  following  the

evidence,  Jerome  took a personal  interest in  pursuing  his opponent, defying the maxim that prosecutors  ought to pursue evidence, not individuals. 58

Ultimately,  though,  it  was  Jerome's  commitment  to  professionalism, and his unwillingness  to play to a populist demand,  that ended his career as a prosecutor.  By 1907, the public began  to  grow impatient  with the prosecution  of corrupt  local  officials. 59 Instead,  they  wanted  Jerome  to  go after  Wall  Street  and  the  moneyed trusts. 6 0 Many  of his own  reform  allies balked  as  he  grew  more  interested  in  rooting  out  local  corruption  than  in leading a fight against powerful wealthy families like the Morgans, Whitneys,  and  Harrimans. 6 1 Ironically,  while  his  success  was  built  on  fair treatment  for all  and  leniency  for less fortunate  criminals,  he  was accused in the  end  of creating "two  kinds  of law-one  for the  rich  and  one  for  the poor." 62 The  professional  approach  did  not, in  the  end,  satisfy  the  populist demand.

D.  CRIMINAL  JUSTICE AS  SOCIAL WELFARE

Part of the  professionalization project  involved a scientific  approach  to crime.  Progressivism  in general was devoted to the proper diagnosis of social problems. 6 3 The social sciences emerged as a popular field in part because  of the  promise  to  describe social  problems  in  a  scientific  way. 6 4 A  careful, unbiased  study  of  the  causes  of  crime  was  considered essential  to  any solution.  While  this  seems  obvious  now,  it  marked  a  departure from  the nineteenth-century  focus on individual responsibility  and retribution. 6 5

Progressive Era reformers observed and responded to the interconnectedness of  the social fabric. The  individual was  no longer

assumed to be in  control  of his actions,  and the  exercise  of free  will seemed more  a fiction  than  a reality  to reformers. 66 Crime  did not  have  one  cause, nor  did punishment  have  a  single effect  on the  individual.  Progressive  Era reformers believed that the stress of  the urban industrial world, harsh working conditions,  and  concentrated  areas  of poverty  produced  social  ills. 67  They also understood that punishing individuals could have negative consequences for  the  community,  thereby  causing  an  increase  in  the  very  problems  they sought to alleviate. 68 For example,  with a typical  Progressive  Era  emphasis on  the  effect  of environment  on  crime,  Jerome  intervened  in  an  assistant's case to ask for a lenient sentence .69  A longshoreman  was convicted for killing a  man  during  a  dockside  brawl. 70 Jerome  argued  that the judge  should  not impose  a severe  sentence  because  the  crime  was  a result of the  defendant's poor upbringing,  his  lack of education,  and the  culture of street  fighting. 7 1

Not  all  Progressive Era  reformers  viewed crime  as the  product  of poverty,  culture,  and  lack  of education.  For instance,  Harry  Olson-a chief prosecutor  and  judge  in  the late-nineteenth century-linked  mental  and emotional  defects  to  crime. 72 Many,  like  Olson,  preferred  sterilization  and institutionalization to  social programs. 73 Olson  oversaw the implementation of  the  "morals court," designed to  address public morality,  including prostitution. 74 Once again, he and others like him used voluntary associations,  criminal  sanctions,  and  expert  treatment  to  address  what  was increasingly  seen as a crisis in morality and a social pathology. 75

For the majority of  Progressive Era criminal justice reformers, however, crime  itself became  a  way  to  study  the  social  pathologies  of an  industrial democratic  state. 76 The social explanation for crime,  in turn, justified greater state involvement  in the lives  of working class Americans. 77 Besides casting members of  the  working class as victims of  poverty,  prosecutors  and reformers  also  blamed  working  class  culture  as  a  cause of criminality. 7

Criminal justice  reform  in the  Progressive  Era  served  as one  of the  origins and early examples  of  the  American  welfare  state.  Reform prosecutors were not only interested in fighting corruption, they also sought to use the criminal law as a means of social control  to reform individuals  and enforce  what they saw as American  values in  cities increasingly populated  by immigrants. 79  A specialized courtroom  staff of social workers  and psychiatrists  was recruited to  assist  prosecutors in  treating individuals  and  communities  instead  of simply punishing criminals.

For instance, legislatures increasingly enacted deserter laws with criminal consequences for husbands who abandoned their families. 8 0 Taxpayers had not yet committed to sharing the burden for these individuals, and legislatures  hoped to  force wayward husbands  to at least take  a share  of the  responsibility. Charities  and  local  government  welfare  agencies  often required  that a woman file  a criminal  complaint against her husband before collecting  support.  New  family  courts  were  established.  These  specialized courts  employed  social workers to  assess the  details  of the  relationship  and determine  whether  a woman  was  worthy  of help."'  Voluntary  associations, charities, and  government agencies  worked  alongside  prosecutors in  an attempt to  solve the  social problem  of deserting husbands  rather than merely punishing them. 82

It  was  not  only  the  laws  and  mechanisms  of government  that  drew prosecutors  to help solve  the  social problems  of the  modern  industrial state. Individuals also  asked prosecutors  to  help  discipline  unruly  children  or punish delinquent husbands. 83 Reformers argued that prisons were ineffective  at deterring  and  rehabilitating  individuals. 8 4 Juvenile  courts  and

the  broad use  of probation were  tools prosecutors  and judges  used to  avoid punishment but still address  social ills. 85

The  state  expanded  through  its  criminal  laws  to  address  the social problems of  the urban industrial state. Progressive  social thought emphasized both  the  interdependent  nature  of society  as  well  as  the  critical  role  that experts and  professionals play in understanding and addressing social problems.  Thus,  reformers  sought to  bring  professionalism  to  the  criminal justice  system not only to rationalize it but also to calibrate  it to address these problems  rather than  punish individuals,  who were  increasingly  seen as the product of social conditions  rather than lone  instigators of bad acts.

E.  THE LEGACY  OF PROSECUTORIAL PROFESSIONALISM

The  Progressive  Era  influenced  criminal justice  in  various  ways.  One prominent  legacy  of the  reformers  is the  cooperative,  voluntary  association between prosecutors,  private organizations,  and the  state. Today,  many cities have drug  courts, family courts,  and other specialized  tribunals  where prosecutors  work with  communities  through  social  workers,  mental  health professionals,  and others.  But our focus  here  is on the  reformers' influence on the idea  of  the  role and responsibilities  of criminal  prosecutors.

The idea of  public prosecution,  exemplified by William Travers Jerome and others in the Progressive Era, was not  wholly innovative. The professional  ideal  of  prosecutors  as  quasi-judicial  officials  meting out  evenhanded justice,  without  fear or  favor,  based on the  evidence  and  a  sense  of proportionality, finds  expression  in  nineteenth-century  court  opinions  and other writings on  the  prosecutorial duty  to seek  justice. 86 However,  as illustrated  by  the  New  York  County  District Attorney's  office,  into  which Jerome  stepped,  early  twentieth-century prosecutors  often  ignored-or  at best  paid  lip  service  to-this ideal. 87 Moreover,  the  professional  ideal was itself  underdeveloped.  For example,  Carolyn Ramsey's history of  nineteenthcentury  prosecution  suggests  that  even  those  who  accepted  the  notion  that prosecutors  ought  to  be  politically  neutral  did  not  necessarily  agree  that prosecutors,  as  representatives  of the  government,  should serve  the  broader public  interest  as  opposed  to  serving  victims  directly.""  Progressive  Era prosecutors significantly advanced earlier professional norms, in part because  of  the  sharpness  and visibility of  their break with their predecessors.

The  Progressive  Era  ideals  of  criminal  prosecution  included  various related  concepts-for example,  that prosecutors  do not take  direction  from, or serve the  interests of, private parties; that prosecutors  serve the public, not the parochial interests of  their political parties or patrons; and that prosecutors  pursue justice in  a disinterested manner,  exercising  power based on  the  law  and  evidence,  not  personal  whim.  Later  writings  reiterated  and expanded  on these  concepts.  For  example,  in  a much-quoted  1935  opinion, the Supreme  Court  reaffirmed  that  prosecutors  represent  "a  sovereignty whose  obligation to govern  impartially is  as compelling  as  its obligation  to govern  at all;  and  whose  interest,  therefore,  in  a criminal  prosecution  is not that  it  shall  win  a  case,  but  that justice  shall  be  done." 89 Then-Attorney General  Robert  Jackson  further explained  this  concept  in  a  1940  published speech  to  federal  prosecutors  that  is  also  cited  often. 90 In  1953,  the  U.S. Department of Justice began codifying  its internal policies and practices  in a manual  for federal  prosecutors  to promote  consistent enforcement  of federal criminal law  in accordance with accepted principles. 9 1 In 1958, in an influential  report  on lawyers' role  in the  adversarial  process,  Lon  Fuller and John  D. Randall emphasized that public prosecutors differ from lawyers with private  clients  in  that  they  are  "possessed . ..  of important  governmental powers that are pledged to the  accomplishment  of  one  objective  only, that of impartial justice."92

A decade  later, the American  Bar Association published the first edition of the  Prosecution  Function  Standards  (now  in its  fourth  edition),  reflecting a professional  consensus about how prosecutors  should run their offices  and exercise their authority. 93 Since then, contemporary codifications of

professional conduct rules for the legal profession have referred to prosecutors'  responsibility  to  use  their  discretionary  power  fairly. 94 These writings are a significant part of  the framework for contemporary understandings  of prosecutorial  independence,  neutrality,  and  detachment. 95 While it is hard to trace  specific features  of  modern-day  prosecution  directly to the  Progressive  Era  reform  movement,  most prosecutors,  courts,  and  the public now accept certain  Progressive  Era ideals with  little  question.

As  the  twentieth  century  progressed,  professionalism  and  expertise supplanted political favoritism and cronyism in prosecutors' offices. Although  prosecutors  still  occasionally  abuse  their  authority,  and  there  is evidence that  entire offices have a  abandoned professional  norms  and processes, 96 the  outright  corruption  of public  prosecutors'  offices-with lawyers who  are either completely  ineffective  or in the pocket  of politicians or wealthy business interests-is  far more  alien to us now than it was before the  Progressive  Era.

For elected prosecutors, however, as the Progressive Era  reform movement illustrated, there is a tension between populism and professionalism.  William Travers Jerome rose to office on a wave  of  popular support  for  reform.  He  restored  faith  in  criminal justice  by  implementing policies to treat defendants  equally regardless  of their wealth and  status  and personally  advocating  leniency  for less  fortunate  criminals  whose  bad  acts may have been  influenced by their circumstances.  Ultimately,  however,  his commitment to professionalism and refusal to interpret his campaign promise as  a  vow  to unseat  the  powerful  and  pursue  Wall  Street  and  the  moneyed trusts regardless  of criminal conduct cost him his popular support.  To a large extent,  the  mid- to  late-twentieth-century  prosecutors  addressed  the  need to garner popular support by campaigning  on their experience and expertise,  not their policies.  Once  professionalism  became  an  established qualification  for office,  prosecutors  could turn their fidelity  to professional  expectations  into a selling point, thus depoliticizing prosecutors' offices. Of course,

contemporary  prosecutors' commitment to strict enforcement  of  the criminal law,  which could be  characterized  as a professional  value, also  aligned with popular sentiment until recent  years.

II. TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY "PROGRESSIVE  PROSECUTORS"

Against the  background  of popular  unease  with  the  criminal  process, today's progressive  prosecutors  have  offered  an  alternative  to  mainstream prosecutors,  just  as  Progressive  Era  prosecutors  offered  an  alternative  to those exercising prosecutorial  power in their day.  Of  course,  the twenty-firstcentury progressive prosecutors probably have not been looking for inspiration  in the  endeavors  of  their Progressive  Era predecessors.  However, as  the  following discussion  shows,  parallels may be drawn.

Although the Progressive Era prosecutors may have had prior prosecutorial  experience,  they  ran  for election  as  outsiders  with  significant popular  support,  opposed  to the  conventional  way  of running prosecutors' offices as  marked  by  favoritism, cronyism,  and  incompetence. Today's progressive  prosecutors  have  different-and  less  stark-complaints  about the status quo given improvements during the past century in law and society, but they  also  run  on  a promise  of change.  Like  the  earlier  Progressive  Era prosecutors,  today's progressive  prosecutors  advance  ideas  for  reform  that take account  of the  broader  socio-economic context  in  which  criminal conduct occurs  and  cases  are prosecuted.  They  do  not simply process  cases but seek to change criminal laws, institutions, and procedure.  In opposing the status quo and the political establishment responsible for it, today's progressive  prosecutors-like  the  Progressive  Era  reformers-have  sought office  by appealing  directly  to the  people  by promising  to protect  the  poor and to bring  the rich and  powerful to  justice. Consequently, today's progressive  prosecutors,  like their Progressive  Era predecessors,  have  faced considerable  backlash from the political  establishment.

This  Part  begins  in  Section  A  by  offering  a  short  review  of relevant developments  in criminal justice  during the past  fifty years.  Section  B  then describes  the  contemporary  progressive  prosecution  movement.  Section  C focuses  particularly  on  progressive  prosecutors'  approach  to the  exercise  of discretion  and how  their approach  differs  from  that  of today's mainstream prosecutors,  whose ideas  of professionalism  are  a legacy  of the  Progressive Era.  Notwithstanding differences  in approach that may look  significant  from a contemporary perspective, today's  mainstream and progressive prosecutors share fundamental understandings that, from a historical perspective, probably make  them  more alike than  different.  Sections  B and  C each draw parallels  to the  earlier Progressive  Era movement.

A.  FRAMING  THE NEW PROGRESSIVE PROSECUTION MOVEMENT

Historians of  twentieth-century criminal  justice in America have documented an increasingly punitive  system. Beginning in the 1970s, politicians  responded to the increases  in the national crime  rate to promote  a more  aggressive  approach to  crime. 97 Since  then, the  country has witnessed an increase  in the  rate of incarceration, disproportionately affecting  AfricanAmerican  men and other minorities. 98 In many,  if not all,  of these  accounts, prosecutorial discretion played a dominant role  in these trends. 99

As  the  country witnessed  these  changes,  there  was  a  historical  turn against experts and professionals  from both the left and the  right. 100 Scholars, the popular press, and others  questioned the Progressive  Era assumption that experts and professionals would  seek truth and transcend political  or personal interest.  Skeptics  argued that professionals  are  all political  actors,  subject to bias, 101 and all have their  own professional self-interest driving their decisions. 10 2

In  the  political  arena,  the  innocence  movement, #MeToo, and  Black Lives  Matter have  popularized  some  critical  aspects  of criminal  justice. 103 The  innocence  movement  has exposed the  fact that some  defendants  serving long  sentences  are not guilty.  This  movement  simultaneously  demonstrated that  prosecutors abuse their discretion at times, contributing  to this injustice. 10 4 The #MeToo  movement  focused  public  attention on  inequality

in  the  criminal justice  system  by protesting  the  under-enforcement  of rape and  sexual  assault,  particularly by  wealthy  white men.  Finally,  Black  Lives Matter  drew  attention  to the  unequal  and  often  dehumanizing  treatment  of black men by law enforcement.

Thus,  the  contemporary  progressive  prosecution  movement  comes  on the  heels  of  concerns  about  mass  incarceration, an  increasing  distrust  of professionals  and experts  of all  sorts,  and  a political  focus  on  inequality  in the criminal justice system. The movement is also accompanied by a growing chorus  of scholars  who  believe  the  solution to  criminal justice  problems  is handing  over control to local communities. 0 5

B.  THE RISE OF THE NEW PROGRESSIVE PROSECUTION  MOVEMENT

By late  2019, a number of elected  prosecutors  across the  United  States came to be known as "progressive prosecutors." 06 These included prosecutors  elected in Boston, Brooklyn,  Kansas  City, Philadelphia,  and San Francisco. 107 But  not  all  were  from the  North  or  from  big  cities.  So-called progressive  prosecutors  have been elected in  Dallas, Houston,  Orlando,  San Antonio  and localities  in Louisiana,  Mississippi,  and Virginia,  among  other places. 108 In general,  beginning  in  2015,  their campaigns  have  been funded

by  a  consortium  led by  George  Soros,  as  part  of a broader criminal justice reform  effort. 09

It is not entirely clear when these twenty-first-century  prosecutors were first labeled as progressives, or when the label became popular.  It is certainly not meant as  a  reference  to Progressive  Era prosecutors.  Prior to 2015,  the term  "progressive"  was  used  conceptually  to  characterize  liberal,  reformoriented  prosecutors." 0 Since  then,  it  has  come  to  be  used  to  describe  an identifiable  group  of elected  prosecutors.  A  2015  interview with  Kim Foxx before  her  election  in  Chicago  referred  to  two  of the  first  Soros-backed prosecutors-Scott Colom  of  Mississippi and  James Stewart  of  Caddo Parish,  Louisiana-as  "progressive  prosecutors.""I In a 2017 article,  David Sklansky offered ten "'best practices' for  ... progressive district

attorneys.""l 2 In her 2019 book on the prosecution reform  movement, Emily Bazelon described  the victors as  "[r]eform-minded prosecutors,"" 3 but others described  these  nontraditional elected  prosecutors and  their  likeminded colleagues  as "progressive  prosecutors."" 4 The label stuck,  although some  prosecutors  in  the  group  might  not  claim  to  be  "progressive"  and others' claims might be  contested." 5

There  is  not  complete  agreement  on  what  distinguishes  progressive prosecutors from their mainstream contemporaries."1 6 Jeffrey Bellin distinguishes progressive prosecutors from "traditional by-the-book prosecutor[s]," in how progressive prosecutors employ the power of "prosecutorial lenience"  to "serve as  a  check on  the [criminal  justice] system's  severity by counteracting overly-punitive police, legislatures, judges,  and juries  ... ."" This,  however,  is  not  necessarily  as  sharp  of a break with the status quo as progressive prosecutors  suggest on the campaign trail. Bellin  notes that  mainstream prosecutors customarily decline to prosecute  some minor offenders  in order to  conserve  resources.  He  argues that when progressive  prosecutors  adopt  controversial  policies to decline  to prosecute  "[m]inor crimes that are extremely common,  like  drug possession, trespassing, and loitering ... apart  from  the rhetoric  surrounding those decisions,  the  distinction  is  one  of degree  rather  than  kind.""1 8 Bellin  also observes that, rhetorically, progressive prosecutors adopt a "'populist  justice' approach  that  attempts to mold  discretionary decisions  to  accord  with

constituent preferences."'" While the same might previously have  been said about  "tough on crime"  prosecutors,  we,  too, identify a  closer link between progressive  prosecutors  and their political base.

Other  journalists and  scholars emphasize  progressive prosecutors' campaign  platforms  and published  policies,  particularly  insofar  as  they  are meant to  redress  over-incarceration  and  racial  bias  in the  criminal  process. These  include  internal policies on when and how to use  prosecutorial  power. Progressive  prosecutors  might be  distinguished  from  traditional  "tough-oncrime" prosecutors in that their campaign platforms have "included abandoning  cash  bail,  declining  low-level  charges,  not pursuing  marijuana cases  and  closely  scrutinizing  police  conduct,  in  efforts to  reform  a  system that they say  over-incarcerates  and disproportionately  punishes  poor people and racial minorities."120

Like  Progressive  Era prosecutors,  today's progressive  prosecutors  are situated  in  a  broader  reform  movement. Bellin  underscores  progressive prosecutors'  efforts  "to  leverage  prosecutorial  power  to  achieve  criminal justice reform."'121  But progressive prosecutors also support legislative reform  of aspects  of the  criminal  justice  system  over  which they  have  no immediate  control.1 2 2 Many  of the  prosecutorial  practices  and  legislative policies  associated  with  progressive  prosecutors  can  be  found  in  a  2018 report, "21 Principles for  the 21st  Century  Prosecutor,"1 23 designed to advance  the movement  and give  it coherence.

Today's  progressive  prosecutors  may  be  regarded  as  successors  to liberal  and reform-minded  predecessors  of a few  years earlier such as  Craig Watkins,  the  Dallas  prosecutor  who established  one  of the  most prominent conviction  integrity  units  out  of concern  for the  fairness  and  reliability  of

death-row defendants' convictions, 124 Milwaukee  prosecutor John  Chisholm, who was lauded in 2015  for his efforts to reduce  the  rate of incarceration,1 25 and  others.1 26 But the progressive  prosecutors  are  distinguished  from their predecessors  in part by their numbers, their visibility,  and their transparency about their exercise of  discretion. Some earlier prosecutors proceeded experimentally  by,  for  example,  promoting  diversion  programs and  other rehabilitative  measures, especially  for low-level offenders.1 27 But these were typically  prosecutors who ran unopposed or faced  no serious  opposition and who did not campaign on their innovative  efforts.

Both  Progressive  Era prosecutors  and today's progressive  prosecutors come from outside the political establishment. Today's  progressive prosecutors  are  also  distinguished  from  mainstream  prosecutors  by  their identity,  which adds to their outsider status.  A large proportion of  progressive prosecutors  are African-American,1 28 women,1 29 or both.  Many have  little  or no  prosecutorial  experience,  instead previously  serving  as criminal  defense or  civil  rights  lawyers. 3 0 Notably,  progressive  prosecutors  have  banded

129 See id

together-or been brought together-both  to  share their experiences  and to provide  mutual  support.' 3 ' Although  other elected prosecutors  belong  to the National  District Attorney's Association or to state prosecutors' associations, these  other prosecutors  have less in common with each other and benefit less from mutual  exchange.

Having called attention to themselves  and to how they differ  from their campaign opponents or  from other  traditional prosecutors, progressive prosecutors  have  been  closely  scrutinized.1 3 2 Some  left-wing  critics  of the criminal  process  have  been heartened by their election1 33 -but not all.1 34  At the  same  time, progressive prosecutors  have  also become a lightning  rod for criticism  from the  right.' 35 In late 2019, U.S. Attorney General William Barr sharply  attacked  progressive  prosecutors  collectively in  a  speech  to  the Fraternal  Order of  Police.1 36 Progressive prosecutors  have also been attacked

[https://perma.cc/CAA6-KYXS]. Progressive prosecutors also  joined an  amicus  brief defending  St. Louis prosecutor Kimberly  Gardner's efforts to  secure the release of an allegedly wrongly  convicted  incarceree,  Lamar  Johnson. Brief  of Amici  Curiae  43 Prosecutors  in Support  of the  State's Motion for New Trial,  State  v.  Johnson,  No.  22941-03706A-01  (Mo. Ct. App.  Oct. 23,  2019).

individually. For  example,  President  Trump  accused  Philadelphia's  Larry Krasner  of "let[ting]  killers  out  almost immediately,"1 37 and the local  U.S. Attorney  blamed  the  shooting  of six  police  officers  on  "a  new  culture  of disrespect  for  law  enforcement"  created  by  Krasner.1 3 8 Some  progressive prosecutors  have  become  embroiled  in  formal  disputes  with  other  public officials.  For example,  after Orlando's Aramis Ayala announced  a policy to decline  to  seek the  death penalty,  the state's governor removed her authority over  capital cases.1 39 The  Pennsylvania legislature authorized  the state Attorney General to initiate firearms charges in Philadelphia,  so that the local police  can ask the Attorney General to bring charges that Krasner declines. 4 0 St.  Louis's Kimberly Gardner has clashed  with the  state's Attorney General over  her  authority  to  remedy  her  predecessor's  conviction  of an  innocent defendant,141  and  she  has  filed  a federal  lawsuit  against the  city,  its  police officers'  association, and  others,  accusing them  of engaging  in  a  racist themselves as  'social justice' reformers"  are "demoralizing to law enforcement and dangerous to  public  safety"  because  they  have  "refus[ed] to enforce  broad  swathes of the  criminal law  ... [a]nd  when they  do  deign to  charge  a  criminal  suspect,  they are  frequently  seeking sentences that are pathetically lenient"). Barr later announced his intention to  scrutinize local prosecutors  whom  he  accused  of  "charging  foreign  nationals  with  lesser  offenses  for  the express  purpose  of avoiding  the  federal  immigration  consequences." Sarah  N.  Lynch  & Makini  Brice, U.S.  Justice Department Files  New  Lawsuits  in Renewed Push  to  Pressure 'Sanctuary  Cities', REUTERS  (Feb.  10,  2020, 4:50 PM),  https://www.reuters.com/article/ususa-justice-immigration/us-justice-department-files-new-lawsuits-in-renewed-push-topressure-sanctuary-cities-idUSKBN2042JW [https://perma.cc/7XYW-6ER9].

139 Ayala v.  Scott,  224  So.  3d 755, 759-60 (Fla. 2017).

conspiracy  which has  included  securing  a  special  prosecutor  to  investigate her office.1 42

One  of the  most  high-profile  controversies  arose  out  of the  Chicago indictment  of Jussie  Smollett, a well-known black actor, for staging his own attack  and  pretending  that  it  was  a  race-based  hate  crime.143  The  State's Attorney's Office,  run by  Kimberly Foxx,  subsequently  dropped  all sixteen charges  against him, accepting the $10,000  bond in exchange.1 4 4 Ordinarily, a  state  prosecutor  would  either  dismiss  charges  entirely,  enter  into  a  plea bargain,  or in  some  circumstances  defer prosecution  with an understanding that charges will be dismissed if  no further wrongs  are committed.  Although it has become  common in corporate criminal cases  for the federal government to receive  a monetary  payment as part  of a non-prosecution  agreement, 145  it is unusual  for state or  local  prosecutors to  accept  money  (other  than restitution)  from  an  individual  in  exchange  for  declining  to  bring  criminal charges.  Meanwhile,  Foxx  stated  that  she  was  personally  recusing  herself from  the  case  because  she had  discussed  it with  some  interested  parties. 146 But,  rejecting the  advice  of an  adviser  in her  office,  she  did  not follow  the normal  recusal  procedure  in  which  the  court  would  be  asked  to  appoint  a special prosecutor from outside  the office, and  instead she delegated prosecution  decisions  to  a subordinate.1 47 Later,  Foxx's office  asserted that the  resolution  of the  Smollett  case  was  in keeping  with  its  policy  regarding non-violent offenses.1 4 8 There  may  well  have been  no  impropriety, but Foxx's failure to follow the norms and practices  of the office  invited critics, including her political  opponents, to  speculate that this result was improperly motivated. 149

Progressive  prosecutors  do  not  espouse  identical  sets  of  policies  and practices. Nor for that matter  do mainstream prosecutors-not  all mainstream prosecutors  are "tough on crime."150  In liberal jurisdictions, many candidates have  opposed  incumbents  or career  prosecutors  who  themselves  endorsed policies and practices associated with the progressive prosecution movement."' Nevertheless,  progressive  prosecutors plainly differ  in general from  most  of their contemporaries  in ways  that seem  evident,  if not easily encapsulated.  And in notable  respects, their differences  have  parallels to the experience of  Progressive Era  reformers,  who  were also outsiders  who challenged  the political establishment based on a different conception  of how prosecutors' offices-and  the  criminal process  in general-should  function. In  Section  C, we  turn  to  the  question Bellin  posed of whether the  difference is  one  of degree  or kind.

C. COMPARING PROGRESSIVE PROSECUTORS  TO THEIR PROGRESSIVE ERA PREDECESSORS

This  Section  examines  whether  contemporary  progressive  prosecutors are  distinctive  from  the  Progressive  Era tradition and  from  contemporary notions  of prosecutorial professionalism  that arose  out of it.  Our focus  is on progressive  prosecutors'  exercise of discretion.  In  particular, we  examine progressive  prosecutors'  controversial  policies  to  refrain from  prosecuting

certain  low-level  offenses  and  to  divert  certain  offenders,  particularly  nonviolent offenders, out of  the conventional criminal process and into rehabilitative  services.

1.  The Politics  of  Criminal  Justice  Reform

Both Progressive Era prosecutors and contemporary progressive prosecutors  shared broad popular support  and the avid attention of local and national  voters.  While  Progressive  Era reform  was  complex,  it  included  a faith  in expertise,  professionalism,  and efficiency,  and a focus  on curing the social ills that  accompanied urban  industrial capitalism. Contemporary progressive  prosecutors  share  some  of the  same concerns  about society  and, like Progressive Era  reformers, believe  that  the internal processes  and organization  of prosecutors'  offices  need  reform.  At  times,  it  seems  as  if progressive prosecutors are skeptical about the value of  prosecutorial professionalism that we  have identified as a legacy  of  the Progressive  Era.1 2 But  at  other  times, it  seems  that  progressive  prosecutors  simply  take  a different  view of how to implement  conventional  professional  values.

Progressive  Era  prosecutors  and  criminal  justice reformers  invoked populist political rhetoric  in their campaign speeches,1 5 3 promising to address corruption  within  prosecutors'  offices  and  the  courts  themselves."1 4  While professionalism  was always the main focus  of  the  movement, there was also a promise to root out corruption and hold  powerful political bosses accountable for  their  misdeeds. Contemporary progressive prosecutors similarly  appeal  to  and  draw  on  a  popular  political  movement.  But unlike candidates  who ran as reformers  in the Progressive  Era, today's progressive prosecutors  aim to root out bias rather than political influence and corruption. Consequently,  their  method  focuses  less  on  reforming  internal  decisionmaking  processes  than  on  altering  substantive  priorities  that  bear  on  the exercise  of discretion."'  Perhaps  the  new  progressive  prosecutors  simply take  professionalism  for  granted,  but  it  is  at  least  worth  noting  a  possible tension between  their populist  rhetoric  and  the  idea of professionalism  with its  focus on processes  rather than outcomes.

Today's would-be progressive prosecutors' campaign platforms address not only considerations of criminal justice policy, but also broader

considerations of social policy, such as racial justice and overincarceration. 5 6 Likewise,  Progressive  Era  prosecutors,  while  focusing  on fairness  and  the  evenhanded  application  of law  to  fact,  also  addressed  the treatment of offenders and the social nature of  crime.  Their objective was not only  to reduce  criminal  activity  in  urban  communities,  but  also to deal with broader social  problems.1 7 By campaigning on their discretionary  charging policies, however,  today's  progressive prosecutors seem  more directly responsive  to  popular  race-based  and  class-based  sentiment.  They  discuss their  discretionary  decision-making  on the  campaign  trail,  expressly  tying their proposed  policies  regarding  prosecutorial  discretion to  the  social  and political  concerns  of the  day.  In contrast,  although  seeking  popular support by opposing establishment  candidates, the  Progressive  Era prosecutors were wary  of popular  control  over  prosecution  decisions, recognizing  that  the pursuit  of popular  support  could  distract  them  from  their  core  mission  of ensuring  that those  who  can  be proved  guilty are  adequately  punished  and others  are  not.

In campaigning on issues of  prosecutorial discretion, progressive prosecutors  seem especially  different from the many mainstream prosecutors who have  had the luxury  of running for office  unopposed or without serious opposition.15 8 But  even  mainstream  prosecutors  facing  serious  opposition have  typically  campaigned  on  their experience  and  expertise,  not  on their policies.' 5 9 In doing  so, mainstream prosecutors convey that they are at least nonpartisan,  if  not  apolitical.1 60 Much like judges  who picture themselves  as

-

nonpartisan-for example, as umpires calling balls and strikes1 61 prosecutors, who  have  been  described  as  "ministers  of justice,"1 62 often depict  themselves  in  similarly  neutral  terms: like  bloodhounds,  they  just "follow the evidence."1 63 The implication is that when presented with similar evidence, other  experienced prosecutors, as professionals, would  make comparable  charging  and plea bargaining  decisions.  What  sets  prosecutors apart,  in their view,  is principally their skill in  investigating and trying cases, not their  individual approach  to exercising discretion; they avoid  the appearance  that they import their own political  and  social policy preferences into  their work.

Of course, the  idea that judges merely apply the  law to the facts without regard  to their own philosophies  or preferences  is now greeted skeptically,  if not derisively,  and the  public  has even  greater reason  to doubt that  elected prosecutors  exercise  discretion  uniformly  based  on  received  wisdom.  The opacity  of prosecutors'  decision-making  processes  and  criteria,1 6 4 which makes pretense hard to expose,  leads commentators  to decry the difficulty  of holding  elected  prosecutors  accountable.1 65 One  might  assume  that  voters will  make  better-informed judgments  if,  like magicians  revealing  how  they perform  their tricks,  prosecutors  explain  how they  decide  whom to  charge,

what  charges  to  bring, and  what  plea  bargains to offer.1 6 6 Progressive prosecutors  promise  to be  more  transparent than  traditional  prosecutors.1 6 7 What some might see as their populist tendencies-in seeming  contrast to the Progressive  Era promise to avoid popular influence-might  be justified as an endeavor to be as open as possible  about how they intend to do their work.

Insofar  as  progressive  prosecutors  campaign  on  promises  to  exercise discretion differently, they  distinguish themselves from many  of  their contemporaries  but  not  necessarily  from  the  Progressive  Era prosecutors, who  made  comparable  campaign  pledges  promising  to resist  the  corroding power  of partisan  politics.  Today's progressive  prosecutors  make  different promises.  For  example, they promise  to resist the  corroding power of racial bias. But both responded to their social context and to the perceived challenge of fair  and impartial  decision-making.  And to  the extent today's progressive prosecutors  avoid campaigning  on how they will make  charging  decisions in any  individual case  to instead focus  on  their  approaches to  exercising discretion-as they  generally but  not invariably do16s-concerns about improper popular influence  diminish.  The danger is that campaign promises to  be  tough  on  particular  kinds  of cases,  like  police  shootings,  can  sound almost  like  promises  about  how prosecutors  will  exercise  their authority  in particular cases,  since these  sorts of cases tend to be  rare and high-profile.1 69

2. Lenity in Aid ofProportionality and  Equality

Not  surprisingly, a defining feature of  contemporary progressive prosecutors' work, and probably the most contentious  feature,  is the way in which  they  exercise  discretion  in  investigating,  charging,  seeking  pre-trial

detention, plea bargaining, sentencing, and employing alternatives to prosecution  and  incarceration. This  is  by  no  means  their  only  distinctive emphasis,  of course.  For  example,  progressive  prosecutors  also  promise  to promote  or protect  certain  group  rights, 70 to  take  measures  to  prevent  or rectify wrongful convictions, 171 and, as noted, to pursue legislative reforms.1 72 But what runs most forcefully  through  progressive  prosecutors' campaign  platforms, positions,  and the  literature on which they draw is their commitment regarding the use of discretionary authority. This is unsurprising,  since the  exercise  of discretion  is  one  of the  most  distinctive, significant, and  varying  features of American  prosecutors'  work 7 3 and perhaps the most puzzling.1 7 4

Many  progressive prosecutors promise more  vigorous pursuit of wrongdoing that-in their view-has been under-prosecuted, such as violent sexual offenses, government corruption, corporate crime, and police violence. 7 5 But more  consequential  is  their promise  to  mitigate  what  they perceive  as the excessive harshness  of  the criminal process.  The rule  of  lenity is  a longstanding judicial  approach to interpreting  criminal  statutes;1 76  many

progressive  prosecutors  have  adopted  a different  sort  of lenity  principle  for prosecutorial  enforcement of the criminal  law. 7 7

Progressive prosecutors' lenity  principle can be explained,  in part,  as an attempt to minimize racial and economic injustice, exemplified by high rates of incarceration,  particularly  of poor people and  minorities.S  The  intent to use prosecutorial  discretion to avoid disproportionately  or unfairly burdening poor people and minorities  is the  common goal behind promises to eliminate or  reduce  applications  for cash bail;1 79 to  divert many non-violent  offenders out  of the  criminal  process,1 80 including  by  declining  to  prosecute  certain

178 See,  e.g., A  Roadmap  for Reform, supra note  170  (promising to  work to  "[e]nd  racist disparities"  which  "plague  every  step  of our  criminal justice  system"  and  to  "[e]nd  mass incarceration"); see also FAIR & JUST  PROSECUTION,  BRENNAN  CTR.  FOR JUST. & THE JUST. COLLABORATIVE, supra note 123, at  3-14  (stating  that  "punitive  policies  [including  overpolicing  of poor and minority  communities]  have  contributed  to  the  incarceration build-up" and  identifying  ten principles  to  reduce  incarceration, including  making  diversion the  rule, charging  with restraint,  encouraging  "the  treatment  (not  criminalization)  of mental  illness" and  drug addiction,  minimizing  misdemeanors,  and  promoting  restorative justice); id. at  16 (giving example  of Milwaukee  prosecutor  who,  after  data  showed  that  black  people  were prosecuted  disproportionately  for possessing  drug paraphernalia,  "stopped  prosecuting  most paraphernalia cases" and instead referred  people to  drug treatment, thereby reducing disparities). Underlying empirical assumptions about the extent to which racial disparities are attributable  to  prejudice  and  implicit bias  in law  enforcement  may  sometimes  be difficult  to prove. See Robert J.  Sampson & Janet L.  Lauritsen, Racial  and  Ethnic Disparities  in Crime and Criminal  Justice in the  United  States, 21 CRME & JUST.  311, 312  (1997)  (discussing how the  politically  and  ideologically  charged  debate  has  made  it  difficult  to  discuss,  let  alone pursue,  a  scholarly  approach to  empirical data about  race and crime).

179 See,  e.g., A  Roadmap  for Reform,  supra note  170  (promising to work to  "[e]liminate cash bail,"  which  "allows  dangerous  people  with  money  to  buy  their  way  out  while  poor people  languish in jail regardless  of how weak the  evidence  is against them"); On the Issues, supra note  169  (promising to  "[w]ork  to  [e]liminate  [c]ash  [b]ail,"  and  stating that "[p]eople should not be kept in  jail simply because  they  are poor").

180 See,  e.g.,  Focusing  Resources on Serious &  Violent Felonies and  Holding 100%  of DUI's Accountable, CHESA  BOUDIN  FOR  DIST.  ATT'Y  2019, https://web.archive.org/web/ 20191220223447/https://www.chesaboudin.com/violent_crime [https://perma.cc/QJ7H77H2] (promising  to  "Expand  Neighborhood Courts[,] ... access  to  PreTrial  Diversion[, and] ... use  of Deferred Entry  of [Judgment]").

categories  of crimes;' 8 '  and to  focus  on  prosecuting  violent  felons.1 82  But progressive prosecutors'  lenity also reflects a belief, like that of  the Progressive Era  prosecutors,  that  for  many  offenders  there are  no  sharp distinctions  between  social problems,  mental  health problems,  and criminal conduct,  and that  the  public  interest,  including  public  safety,  is  often  best served by  rehabilitative  and  social  services.  This  helps  explain  progressive prosecutors'  support  for alternatives  to  prosecution  and  incarceration,  such as drug  and  mental health  treatment  and  restorative  justice. 83 Also  like Progressive  Era reformers,  progressive  prosecutors are  committed to a databased approach. They have promised to collect and release  data both to show how  their  policies  are  being  implemented  and  to  enable  themselves  and others  to  attempt to measure the  impact.1 8 4

Progressive prosecutors'  commitment  to  lenity has echoes in the Progressive  Era approach.  The Progressive  Era movement  also  invoked the rhetoric  of leniency,  although not so  centrally,  and its  concept drew  in part on  a  commitment  to  fair  treatment  of the  poor.1 8 5 But  on  the  surface,  the progressive  prosecutors' principle  of lenity as the  norm  or  presumption  for certain  offenses,  rather than as the  occasional exception  intended to conserve resources  or to avoid  grossly unfair  or  excessive  punishment,  departs  from the approach of the Progressive Era prosecutors. Prosecutors have traditionally  been expected to serve a  gate-keeping function to avoid

prosecuting innocent individuals,1 86 and norms of prosecutorial professionalism have long reflected the importance of  avoiding  public pressure to bring charges  without adequate  proof'1 8 7 But for Progressive  Era reformers, rigorous  enforcement  of criminal  law  (when  supported  by  the proof) was  the  antidote  to  lawlessness, arbitrariness, and  partisanship.' 8 8 Progressive Era  reformers  expected  equality  to  flow  from a  professional approach to law enforcement.  They were committed to equal treatment of  the rich and the  poor, which they believed would naturally follow from the anticorruption effort  as  well as the  focus on  the  treatment,  as  opposed  to punishment,  of offenders.

The lenity rule  also departs,  although less  sharply, from the  exercise  of discretion by contemporary, mainstream prosecutors who  built  on  the Progressive Era  legacy  of  professionalism. For  mainstream  prosecutors, decisions to refrain from prosecuting offenders where there is adequate proof have  been the  exception,  not the  norm.  These  decisions were  conventionally made on an individual,  case-by-case  basis, not categorically.' 8 9

Progressive  Era prosecutors  believed that equal treatment would follow from the successful effort to prevent arbitrary and  partisan charging

decisions.  Professionalism  would  ensure  that the  rich  did  not get  an unfair advantage over  the poor. By  the  mid-twentieth century,  the  legacy  of Progressive  Era  reform  was largely  taken  for granted.  Prosecutors  came  to assume  that,  as  professionals, they  could  avoid  the  influence  of partisan politics  and  other  impermissible  or  irrelevant  considerations  when  making charging decisions, while still  making  distinctions based  on  legitimate criteria.  As  a  New  Jersey judge  explained  in  1952,  the  ad  hoc  exercise  of discretion  is  "the  everyday  function  of a prosecutor,"  who may  decline  or dismiss  prosecutions for  any of  countless different  reasons  but  whose decisions "are unexceptionable if  made in  good faith."1 90 Eventually, particularly in  urban prosecutors' offices, internal policies governing charging and  plea  bargaining  decisions  in  recurring  types  of  cases  were developed  with the  aim  of providing  further protection  against  arbitrariness and favoritism.191

Although lenity therefore is not unique to the  contemporary progressive prosecutors,  their  rationale  for  lenity  seems  to  set them  apart.  Mainstream prosecutors have long declined to prosecute based on forensic and administrative  considerations-for example,  because  an offender  was more useful  as  a witness,  because  a government  witness  became  unavailable,  or because a prosecution was simply  not  worth the cost.1 92 Many  also implemented  a principle  of proportionality-e.g.,  declining to prosecute,  or to  prosecute as  vigorously as  the  law  and  facts  permit,  to  mitigate  the excessive  harshness  of the  criminal  process.1 93 And  many  also  sought  to implement a principle  of equality-i.e., to treat similarly  situated individuals

equally.1 94 In doing so, mainstream prosecutors have cultivated the appearance  that prosecuting is  apolitical and that discretionary  decisions  are made by reference to time-honored professional  values and understandings.

Insofar  as  today's progressive  prosecutors  are  implementing  different charging  criteria  from their mainstream  counterparts,  it  is not  entirely  clear whether their  approach  to prosecutorial  discretion  is  different  in  principle. Progressive prosecutors might  be understood to be applying ordinary, accepted  principles  of  charging  discretion.  What is different  may not be how they  conceptualize  their role  or,  in particular,  the  principles  governing their exercise  of discretionary  power,  but how they  see the  criminal process  and the  wider  world  in which  they perform  their work.  Progressive  prosecutors make  different judgments  from their mainstream  contemporaries  regarding when punishment is necessary to serve the public interest because they think the  public interest  is often better served  by an alternative  to prosecution  and punishment.  Further, they  have  a different social understanding  about when similarly situated  individuals are being treated differently:  they perceive  that implicit  racial  bias and  structural  racism  pervade the  criminal process,  often making  it  unjust  to  apply  criminal  laws  as  strictly  as  law  and  facts  would allow.1 95

Progressive prosecutors view the colorblind approach of  their predecessors as  inadequate  given  their  understanding of how  racial  bias defines  the system.  In other words, the professional  approach  might promise to treat like individuals alike,  regardless of  particular characteristics  like race. But  a progressive  prosecutor will  be  wary  of how  even  this  seemingly  fair approach  might have  a  different impact  on African-American  communities. For  instance,  a mainstream  prosecutor  might offer  a more  lenient plea to  a white defendant with no prior convictions than an African American who had been  arrested  previously  for a nonviolent  crime.  A progressive  prosecutor, understanding  how policing policies target young black men, might offer the same deal to both.

In focusing on the social impact of  crime and criminal  justice, progressive  prosecutors  build  on the  legacy  of Progressive  Era  reformers, who  introduced  the  notion  that  crime  is  a  social  rather  than  an  individual problem.  Of course,  at least  some  Progressive  Era  reformers  also  looked  at heredity and race  as the  source  of criminality-a stark contrast from today's progressive  prosecutors who would all certainly condemn  any such theory.

3.  Categorical  Presumptions  ofLenity

Progressive  Era  reformers  and  contemporary  progressive  prosecutors were  equally  concerned  about  two  different  systems  of justice:  one  for the poor and one for the rich. Progressive  Era prosecutors believed that the main source of the problem was corruption. Contemporary progressive prosecutors, however,  see  the  problem  as  more insidious-the  result  of implicit  bias  and  other  forms  of discrimination.  To  address  the  problem  of unequal  justice,  Progressive Era  reformers  primarily  sought  to root  out corruption  and  implement  fair  and  professional  procedures.  Contemporary progressive  prosecutors, among  other  things,  advance  lenity,  refusing  in some cases to prosecute  entire  categories  of  crimes.

Progressive  prosecutors' efforts to implement  their vision of the public good  through  presumptions  against  prosecuting  certain crimes, such as marijuana  possession,  are  particularly  controversial.1 96 This  policy  seems distinctive  not just because  of its  lenity,  but also  because  of the  categorical approach  to  discretionary  decision  making  in  which  lenity  is the  norm  for certain  categories  of criminal  conduct.  Mainstream  prosecutors,  even  those who  approve  of lenity,  tend  to  take  a  case-by-case approach.1 97 In  other words,  in mainstream contemporary  prosecution, it tends to be the individual that invites  the  forgiving  treatment,  not  a social  situation  as  a whole.  Their implicit understanding  is that the legislative judgment to criminalize conduct, thereby subjecting  it to criminal prosecution,  is generally  entitled to  respect.

Legislatures contemplate  that  prosecutors  will  exercise discretion  when enforcing  the  criminal  law.  Therefore,  it does not undermine  the  legislature to decline to prosecute  some  individuals who are provably guilty of offenses to  conserve limited resources. The  prosecutor is still  deferring to  the legislature because the objectives of  the criminal law can be achieved without punishment,  the  benefits  of prosecution  might  outweigh  the  harms,  or  the legislative  purpose may  not  be  served  for  other  reasons  particular  to  the individual and  the  circumstances of the  case.  But  adopting  a  categorical policy  not to prosecute  conduct that the  legislature has  said is  a crime  might seem to countermand the legislative judgment and thus comprise a failure to faithfully  execute  the  law. 98

At least with respect  to marijuana cases, one might argue that progressive  prosecutors  are simply  a  step  ahead  of the  state  legislatures, which  is  legitimate  when  legislatures  are  slow  to  repeal  laws  that  become unworthy  of  enforcement in  light  of  changing social  understandings. 1 9 9 Progressive  prosecutors  were  not the  first to stop prosecuting  individuals for possessing small amounts of  marijuana in states that had not yet decriminalized its  personal use  and  possession. 2 oo  In  generally  forgoing prosecutions  of  marijuana possession,  progressive  prosecutors might be said to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of earlier  prosecutors  who  declined  to  prosecute outmoded  victimless  crimes such as lewd cohabitation, adultery,  and similar sex offenses  involving  consenting  adults.  But this does not explain why,  for example, Boston's Rachael Rollins adopted a presumption against prosecuting  trespassing  and  shoplifting. 20 '  No  one  would  suggest that  the underlying  conduct  should be allowed,  much  less that it has  become  socially acceptable.  Rather,  Rollins's rationale  is that public  safety can be  protected more  effectively by alternative  approaches.202

To  critics,  underenforcement  jeopardizes  public  safety. 20 3 Progressive prosecutors  disagree.  For example, Rollins  has asserted,  with distinct echoes of Progressive Era prosecutors, that "protect[ing] the community's safety  ... is  best accomplished  when the office  first considers  solutions  that direct those  in need  of treatment-mental  health,  substance  use  disorder,  or otherwise-to  available  resources,  minimize  court  involvement,  and  keep people  free of criminal  records and  able  to  work  and  function  without government  oversight." 2 0 4 There  is insufficient  data to  resolve the  empirical disagreement. 20 s Progressive prosecutors may  be rejecting mainstream prosecutors'  empirical  assumptions  or  predictions  and  leaving  it  to  future study to decide whose guess is correct.  But they are  not necessarily  rejecting the  conventional  conception  of prosecutors'  role  in  exercising  discretionary power. Once  convinced  that  an  individual  is  provably  guilty  of a  crime, prosecutors  are  supposed  to  decide  whether  to  pursue  a  prosecution  based principally  on the  need  to  protect  the  public  and  on  other  public  interests, such  as  economy and  fairness, that  may  point  in different directions. Progressive  prosecutors  might argue  that they are  simply weighing  interests differently  or striking  a different balance.

Critics  also  challenge  this  approach  as  anti-democratic. 2 0 6 While  state legislators understand and anticipate that prosecutors will decline to public  safety. A  large  number of criminal  convictions  secured by  prosecutors  nationally  are for  drug,  property,  and  public  order  offenses,  which  are  often  driven by  economic,  mental health,  and  social  needs  .... Data show  that  a  carceral  approach  to  low-level,  non-violent offenses  can  do more  harm than  good . . .. As  a  result, jurisdictions  across  the  country  are taking a  smarter approach to  punishment and  accountability. Law enforcement  agencies and prosecutors' offices  are collecting and analyzing new and varied sources of data, and they are safely beginning to  move all but the most serious offenses away from carceral punishment and its downstream collateral harms.").

205 See Berman, supra note  1  (quoting Professor Richard Berk's observation that it is too soon to  measure  the impact of progressive prosecutors' policies  on crime  rates).

206 See,  e.g., Steve  Volk, Larry Krasner  vs. Everybody: Inside  the Philly  DA's  Crusade  to Revolutionize Criminal  Justice, PHILA.  (Nov.  23,  2019,  9:00 PM),  https://www.phillymag.co m/news/2019/1l/23/larry-krasner-criminal-justice-reform/ [https://perma.cc/YK26-DUKJ] (recounting  U.S. Attorney Bill  McSwain's  criticisms of  Philadelphia prosecutor  Larry Krasner, including  "that  Krasner has 'abdicated'  his  responsibility as  a  prosecutor  and disrespected  democracy by  failing to  enforce the  law  as it's  been passed down to  him"); see also Foster, supra note  132,  at 2534-45.

prosecute some  individual  offenders,  one  might  assume  that  they  do  not expect  prosecutors  to  decline  to  prosecute whole  categories  of offenses; Otherwise,  the  legislature would  not have  adopted the  law  in the  first place. At  least  at  one  time,  it  might  have been  considered  nonfeasance for  a prosecutor to categorically  refuse  to  investigate  or prosecute  certain  crimes, rather  than  making  good faith  decisions  among  individual  cases. 2 07 Today, prosecutors'  decisions  not to  prosecute  whole  categories  of crimes,  absent exceptional circumstances, might  be viewed as a repudiation of  the legislature's  intent-and  therefore the  democratic will-underlying the relevant  criminal  laws.  Even  more  difficult to  square  with legislative  intent would  be  situations  where  prosecutors  absolutely  decline  to  bring  certain charges. 20 8 An  example  is  the  Orlando  prosecutor's  decision  never to  seek the  death sentence-that  is,  never to bring  charges of capital  murder. 2 09

Bellin's answer is that exercising  discretion leniently is a legitimate  and lawful  check  on  state power to punish,  and  there  is nothing  amiss in  starting with an understanding  that leniency will be  the norm  with respect to certain criminal conduct. 21 0 Even if a state legislature does not endorse this approach, the  authority to  adopt  it is implicit  in prosecutors'  state  constitutional  status as executive  branch  officials.  While  one  can debate  whether  any  given prosecutor  is  exercising  this power wisely  or abusively-and  the  electorate can ultimately resolve this question for itself  through the  democratic process211-there  is nothing generally  anomalous or anti-democratic  about a presumption  that charges will not be pursued  in  a category  of cases.

There are analogues in mainstream prosecutors' work. For example, the federal  and  state  prosecution  of  tax crimes-willful  failure to  file federal  or state tax, willful failure to declare  income, false  statements  in tax filings, and the  like-is surely the  exception,  not the  rule.  Mostly,  the problem  is  left to civil  tax authorities  to  address.  But prosecutors  diverge  from this practice  at times,  for  example, if the  tax  evader  is  a  repeat  offender  or-as  in  Al Capone's  case-is  guilty  of more serious  but  unprovable crimes, 2 12 the

offender  has  a special  obligation  to the  tax law, 213 or the  nature  or extent of wrongdoing is particularly egregious.  Arguably,  progressive prosecutors and mainstream prosecutors  simply  make  different judgments  about when a rule of lenity  should apply.

4.  Holistic  Prosecuting

Finally,  today's progressive  prosecutors  seem  different  from many  of their contemporaries  in their broad-if not holistic-conception  of  their role, which follows  from their conception  of  the  role  of  criminal  law in  society. 21 4 Conventional  prosecutors  are  primarily  case  processors:  their assigned  role is to decide whom to prosecute  and how. 2 1 5 They leave  it to civil government agencies to decide how to deal with the mental  health or social problems that might influence  offenders' wrongdoing.  But progressive  prosecutors tend to see  criminal  problems  as  interconnected with  other  social  problems-an insight  pioneered  by  the  Progressive  Era  reformers  and  reinforced  more recently  with  the  advent  of drug  courts  and  other  diversion  programs  for nonviolent offenders.  This explains, at least in part, progressive prosecutors' conviction  that  providing  mental  health  and  social  services  to  offenders rather than prosecuting and imprisoning them can sometimes promote public safety at  lower individual and public cost. They  champion diversion programs in which offenders are offered entry into treatment as an alternative to prosecution and the risk of incarceration. 2 16 This  is  not an innovation,  but rather  a  recent  incarnation  of the  Progressive  Era  approach  to  crime  as  a social problem.  In  turning away  from  a more  draconian  nineteenth-century conception of  individual responsibility and crime,  the Progressive Era reformers  involved  the  state  in  a more  intricate  way  in  policing  individual

lives.  The  welfare  state  itself,  as  the  historian  Michael  Willrich  has argued, was born in part of this concept of criminal justice.217

While  progressive  prosecutors  are  more  committed  to  alternatives  to prosecution  and  incarceration,  many  conventional  prosecutors  also  employ diversion programs. Contemporary prosecutors are involved in social engineering  in  other  respects  as  well.  For  example,  federal  prosecutors  in corporate criminal cases use non-prosecution and  deferred  prosecution agreements  to  induce  corporations  to  rehabilitate  themselves  by  adopting internal structural reforms. And "community prosecutors" have used criminal  power to  address  social  problems,  such  as  vagrancy,  that  might ordinarily  have  been  addressed  by  civil authorities. 21 8 One  might argue that strict case processing is becoming the exception. The difference for progressive  prosecutors  may  simply  be  in  how they  tackle  social  problems and which ones they prioritize.

III.  LESSONS  FROM HISTORY

Even though the two  criminal justice  reform movements,  separated  by about  a  century, significantly  diverge  in  goals  and  substance,  progressive prosecutors  can both take inspiration  from their predecessors  and learn  from them.  We  close by drawing  from Progressive  Era  criminal justice  reform  to offer  a few  such lessons.

Progressive  Era prosecutors  such as William Travers  Jerome  faced the challenge  of reconciling  professionalism  with  a  movement  closely  tied  to popular  support,  and  contemporary  progressive  prosecutors  face  a  similar challenge.  To the  extent that the  dictates  of professionalism  lead  to  results that  win  popular support there may  be  little  problem, but  progressive prosecutors will not always be so fortunate, particularly because prosecutorial professionalism often  calls  for  making  individual  decisions based on evidence that is inaccessible  to the public.

While progressive prosecutors embrace policy priorities that  win popular  support,  and  the  public may  have an interest in ensuring  that prosecutors  implement  these  policies  as  promised,  the  public  is  in  a  bad position to assess how policy priorities play out in individual cases,  even with greater transparency.  Consequently,  professionalism  often  calls for ignoring or even disappointing popular calls for results in individual cases: prosecutorial  decisions in particular cases  ought to be made by professionally independent  prosecutors  based  on  the  evidence  and  applicable,  articulable principles  and policies.  As  we  learned  from the  Progressive  Era reformers, independence  from the public and the political  establishment goes to the core objective of the  prosecutor's  role:  exercising  discretion  on  behalf  of the public based on a professional commitment to assess the evidence objectively and  make  decisions  in  a  fair  and  even-handed  way. 2 1 9 But  it  is  harder  to achieve  that  independence  when  prosecutors  garner popular  support  with  a particular agenda.

Particularly  given  that  strong  social  movements  have  helped  propel progressive  prosecutors to victory,  the public may expect charging  and pleabargaining  decisions  in  individual  cases  to  conform  to  its  preferences.  For example,  the  public  may  perceive  that  progressive  prosecutors,  who  were elected  against  the  background  of the  #MeToo  movement,  abandon  their campaign  promises  if  they  fail  to  charge  or  convict powerful  defendants  in high-profile  sexual-abuse cases.  Likewise,  given  the  popular  progressive conviction that mainstream prosecutors  mishandled  cases  of police  violence against  civilians,  a progressive  prosecutor's constituency may feel  betrayed by  a progressive prosecutor  who fails  to successfully  prosecute  violence  by police,  even when from the prosecutor's perspective,  the  result is dictated by law and fact.  Part of  the  legacy of Progressive  Era criminal justice  reform  is that  public  preferences should  not  govern  criminal  justice outcomes  in individual cases, and  contemporary prosecutors undoubtedly share  this understanding. But  in  making  evidence-based decisions, especially the decision not to charge, progressive prosecutors  may disappoint their constituencies. Conversely,  progressive  prosecutors  may  be  influenced  by public pressure  in subtle  and unacknowledged  ways.  As recent controversies in  federal  criminal  prosecution  remind us,  prosecutors'  independence  from those who put them  in office  cannot be accepted  as a given. 220

One  lesson  may  be  that  prosecutors  should  discourage  unreasonable expectations.  While  nuance  is  not  normally  a feature  of the  stump  speech, progressive  prosecutors  today  should be  careful  in  their campaign  rhetoric not to promise too much in terms of results in particular types of  cases  and to remind  and educate the public about the nature  of the criminal process.  This may not be easy,  given that races for prosecutorial  office  are  competitive and social  media  encourages  the  publication of brief,  popular  sentiments,  but progressive  prosecutors committed  to  the  values  of  professionalism  and progressive  policies ought to emphasize  both.

Another  challenge  is  suggested  by  a  point  of  contrast  between  the current era and the Progressive Era-the challenge of preserving professional values while  implementing  new,  progressive policies.  In some  offices,  upon a progressive prosecutor's  election, there  has  been a  purge of  career prosecutors. 2 2 '  This  is  not entirely  surprising.  To change  the  office  culture, newly elected prosecutors might understandably  replace prosecutors who are hostile to new  policies and  practices  or  encourage them  to  leave.  But this  is where  today's progressive prosecutors  might be expected  to take a different approach  from Progressive  Era prosecutors who had a powerful  incentive  to replace  incompetent  staff members  who got their jobs  through the  political machine.  Prosecutors'  offices  have  come  a  long  way  since  then,  and  even where  progressive prosecutors  disagree with their predecessors' approach  to questions of policy, they  are likely  to  benefit  from  career prosecutors' institutional memory, relationships with  the court, and  commitment  to internal policies  and  practices  that  promote  enduring  professional  values (e.g.,  avoiding  wrongful  convictions,  candor to the  court,  fair  process)  that progressive  prosecutors wish to preserve. While  retaining  career prosecutors might  be  problematic  in  that  it  can  slow  the  pace  of progressive  change, continuity  can also serve to ensure that professional values are maintained. 2 22 Progressive  prosecutors'  fresh  perspectives  as  outsiders  may  be  useful  in changing  a  recalcitrant  institutional  culture,  but,  given  the  importance  of preserving professionalism,  progressive  prosecutors may be better served by converting  at least some  career prosecutors  rather than replacing them.

In addition to avoiding all-out purges of  personnel, progressive prosecutors  should be careful  not to cut procedural  or ethical  corners  in order to obtain particular results.  Even if  the  result is fair, the prosecutorial  norms,

traditions, and  ethical rules not only ensure fair results,  they also reassure  the public  about the  legitimacy  of the  process.  This  reassurance  is  particularly important  because  the  progressive  platform  is  controversial,  and  political opponents  might  look  for  reasons  to  question  the  legitimacy  of particular outcomes.  Chicago prosecutor  Kimberly  Foxx's departure  from convention in Jussie  Smollett's case is a stark example, which may have  done more harm to the progressive  cause than good. 223 Following established norms, policies, and  practices  helps  reassure  the  public  that  the  resolution  of a case  is  fair. And this sort of legitimacy is critical, particularly in a high-profile, politically charged  case  such as Smollett's.

A similar tension between professionalism  and populism may arise, not only in individual cases, but  with respect  to  progressive prosecutors' charging  policies, such as a policy to divert individuals arrested for marijuana possession  to  social  programs.  In  advancing  alternatives  to  incarceration, contemporary  progressive prosecutors are taking a page from the Progressive Era  playbook.  But  prosecutorial  policies  are  not  legitimate  merely  because they enjoy  popular support.  While some  may see popular support as conferring  democratic  legitimacy on lenity policies,  such as a policy  against prosecuting  possession  of marijuana  for  personal  use,  popular  support  is neither  a necessary  nor  sufficient  justification.  A  lesson  of the  Progressive Era, with its emphasis on professionalism over populism, was that prosecutors  should set policy priorities-for example, prioritizing corruption prosecutions-based on the same sorts of  professional values (e.g., proportionality and  even-handed  justice)  that  govern  decision  making  in individual  cases. 22 4

While  diversion programs  have persisted  for so long  in part because  of evidence  pointing to their effectiveness,  they are also  imperfect  and often  of unproven  use.  They  may  have  unintended  negative  consequences. 225  The Progressive  Era  has  taught  us  that  blind  faith  in  the  association  between

criminal justice  and  private  organizations  is misplaced. 22 6 Social  programs, such as diversion  programs, advanced by prosecutors can be an improvement over harsh carceral  punishment but may  still be a problematic form  of social control.  They invariably  involve a greater degree  of government  supervision and  involvement  in the  daily  lives  of individuals,  especially  the  poor  and minorities. 227 Putting  too  much  faith  in  these sorts  of programs, as  the Progressive  Era reformers  did, may lead to disappointment  or to the creation of  unanticipated problems. While  experimentation is  laudatory,  today's progressive  prosecutors have  a responsibility  to follow  up by collecting  data (as many have  promised to do) and then by fixing or replacing what does not work.  Ultimately,  evidence-based  judgments  about  whether,  as  a matter  of policy,  to  pursue  alternatives  to  prosecution  in  particular  classes  of cases should be  made by elected  prosecutors-not  by public referendum-against the  background of professional  criminal-justice  values  and expectations,  not based exclusively  on social policy preferences.

CONCLUSION

Although Progressive Era reformers and today's  reform-oriented progressive  prosecutors  are  separated  by  about  a  century  and  much  has changed over that  time, a  comparison between them provides  some interesting and important insights. This is so for  two reasons. First, progressive  prosecutors  inherit  important  traditions  and  legacies  from  the Progressive  Era  movement,  and,  second,  both  groups  of prosecutors  were elected on  a  wave of popular  support. Progressive  Era  prosecutors  and today's progressive prosecutors, unlike most of  today's  mainstream prosecutors, were  elected  by  a  politically  active,  mobilized, and  vigilant segment of  the public.  It is a sign of a healthy democracy  when those affected by  criminal  justice policy  are active and  involved  in  the  nature of  its implementation.  But,  at the  same  time,  this  direct  involvement  can  pose  a threat  to  prosecutorial independence. Because  prosecutors'  decisions  in individual  cases are-and ought to be-driven by complex considerations of fact  and law,  they  are  not  well-suited to  popular  oversight.  Some  degree  of insulation  is necessary  to  ensure  fairness  in  individual  cases.  Prosecutorial

independence  is under greater  strain when the prosecutor has been elected by a populist movement.

The task of the Progressive  Era prosecutors  was to replace  the corrupt and  incompetent  uses  of criminal  authority  by  prosecutors  controlled  by political  machines.  In  contrast,  today's progressive  prosecutors,  although also  reformers,  are  not promoting  wholesale  change.  While  the  progressive prosecutors  of this century  share their predecessors' concern for the  broader social  context  in  which  the  criminal  law  is  enforced,  they  do  not  make  a priority  of improving  the  efficiency  or  professionalism  of their staff,  as did the  Progressive  Era reformers.  They seem instead to  accept the  expectations of prosecutorial  professionalism,  including  prosecutorial  independence,  that are a legacy of  the  Progressive  Era. Their emphasis  is on the enunciation  and implementation of  internal policies and practices-particularly those promoting lenity through the exercise of prosecutorial discretion with respect to  diversion, charging,  plea  bargaining, and  sentencing--that, in  their view, better express the  aspirations of the  criminal justice process.

Thus, current progressive  prosecutors do not see themselves  as rejecting or  reinterpreting  the  principles  of prosecutorial  professionalism  that  they inherited  from  their mainstream  contemporaries.  They  can  argue  that their reform  agenda simply expresses their conviction that mainstream prosecutors do not  adequately meet  professional expectations in practice, or  that mainstream  prosecutors  have  not  adequately  applied  general  professional norms  to  the  particular  social  and  criminal-justice problems  of the  day. Progressive  prosecutors'  innovations-even  such  sharp  departures  as  the wholesale  diversion  of certain  classes  of criminal  cases  out  of the  criminal justice system-can  largely be  justified in  terms  of  now-conventional professional  norms of prosecutorial  discretion. They  point to data to support their  argument  that  the  concerns  that  all  prosecutors share  for  the  public safety  and  the  well-being  of the  community  are  better  served,  in  certain classes  of cases, by alternatives  to incarceration. 2 28

But  at  the  same  time,  there  is  a  risk  that-however  newly-elected prosecutors  might rationalize  their reform  agendas-they  will be tempted to conform  to the  expectations  of those  who  elected  them to  office.  Many  of their  constituents  may  focus  more  on  the  particular  decisions  made  by progressive  prosecutors  in  individual  cases  than  on  whether  the  decisionmaking process is principled, fact  based and  data  driven. Progressive prosecutors' challenge as elected officials will be, when  professional principles  demand,  to make  unpopular  as  well  as popular  decisions,  while

striving  to  preserve  popular  support.  As  the  Progressive  Era prosecutors learned,  that is no  easy  task.